<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XCVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-96" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>APPENDIX A</h2>
			<p><i>Ep.</i> xciv. deals, on the whole, with the question whether doctrines without precepts are enough for the student and the philosopher; <i>Ep.</i> xcv. whether precepts without doctrines will suffice. Seneca concludes that they are both necessary and are complementary to one another, especially in view of the complicated life which one is called upon to live, with its many duties and choices. The terms discussed, with some of the Greek original definitions, may be summed up as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>(1) The outward expressions of <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἐπιστήμη</span> (<i>scientia</i>, knowledge) and of the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">κοιναὶ ἔννοιαι</span> (<i>notiones communes</i>, <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">προλήψεις</span>, innate ideas) are found in the form of <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀξιώματα</span> (<i>pronuntiata</i>, incontrovertible statements), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">δόγματα</span> (<i>placita</i>, <i>decreta</i>, <i>scita</i>, doctrines, tenets, dogmas, principles). Determined by <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ὅροι</span> (<i>definitiones</i>, definitions), they are tested by their <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀξία</span> (<i>honestum</i>, moral value), by the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">κριτήριον</span> (norma iudicii, standard of judgement) or <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">κανών</span> (<i>lex</i>, <i>regula</i>, etc.), and by the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ὀρθὸς λόγος</span> (<i>recta ratio</i>, universal law, etc.). By such means the doctrines of philosophy are contrasted with <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">δόξα</span> (<i>opinio</i>) and with a <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">κατάληψις</span> (<i>cognitio</i> or <i>comprehensio</i>) which falls short of completeness and perfection. Conduct which results from a thorough understanding and performance of such doctrines is <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">κατόρθωμα</span> (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">τέλειον καθῆκον</span>, <i>perfectum officium</i>, “absolute duty”).</p>
			<div class="calibre3"/>
			<p>(2) The <i>pars praeceptiva</i> (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">παραινετική</span>) of philosophy, which deals with “average duty” (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">καθῆκον</span>, <i>commune</i> or <i>medium officium</i>), is approved, among others, by Posidonius, Cicero (see the <i>De Officiis</i>), and Seneca. It is related to active living and to the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀδιάφορα</span> (<i>media</i> or <i>indifferentia</i>) (see Subject Index) which play so large a rôle in the individual’s daily existence. This department of “counsel,” “admonition,” or “advice” has many forms. For <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">παραίνεσις</span> (<i>monitio</i>) are needed: the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">λόγος προτρεπτικός</span> (<i>exhortatio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">τόπος ὑποθετικός</span> (<i>suasio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀποτροπή</span> (<i>dissuasio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἐπιτίμησις</span> (<i>obiurgatio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">λόγος παραμυθητικός</span> (<i>consolatio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">αἰτιολογία</span> (<i>causarum inquisitio</i>), <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἠθολογία</span> (<i>descriptio</i>), and all the gamut of precepts which run from blame to praise. These are reinforced by <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀπόδειξις</span> (<i>probatio</i>, <i>argumentum</i>, proof) and by such helps as <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">χρεῖαι</span>, <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ἀπομνημονεύματα</span> (<i>sententiae</i>, proverbs, maxims).</p>
			<p>By such stages of advancement, <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">προκοπή</span> (<i>progressio</i>), and relying upon <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">παραδείγματα</span> (<i>exempla</i>), one rises, through practical precepts and the observance of duties, to an appreciation of the virtues, the contemplative mastery of the Universe, and to the Supreme Good, conformity with Nature (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ὁμολογουμένως τῇ φύσει ζῆν</span>, <i>vivere convenienter naturae</i>).</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
