<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-45" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XLIII. ON THE RELATIVITY OF FAME</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2913"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> Do you ask how the news reached me, and who informed me, that you were entertaining this idea, of which you had said nothing to a single soul?  It was that most knowing of persons,&mdash;gossip. “What,” you say, “am I such a great personage that I can stir up gossip?” Now there is no reason why you should measure yourself according to this part of the world;<sup id="calibre_link-493" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-491" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> have regard only to the place where you are dwelling. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2914"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> Any point which rises above adjacent points is great, at the spot where it rises.  For greatness is not absolute; comparison increases it or lessens it.  A ship which looms large in the river seems tiny when on the ocean. A rudder which is large for one vessel, is small for another.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2915"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> So you in your province<sup id="calibre_link-494" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-492" type="noteref"><span>[</span>2<span>]</span></a></sup> are really of importance, though you scorn yourself.  Men are asking what you do, how you dine, and how you sleep, and they find out, too; hence there is all the more reason for your living circumspectly.  Do not, however, deem yourself truly happy until you find that you can live before men’s eyes, until your walls protect but do not hide you; although we are apt to believe that these walls surround us, not to enable us to live more safely, but that we may sin more secretly. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2916"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> I shall mention a fact by which you may weigh the worth of a man’s character: you will scarcely find anyone <span><span id="calibre_link-2917" data-page-number="287" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/311" data-page-index="311" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/311"></span></span>who can live with his door wide open.  It is our conscience, not our pride, that has put doorkeepers at our doors; we live in such a fashion that being suddenly disclosed to view is equivalent to being caught in the act.  What profits it, however, to hide ourselves away, and to avoid the eyes and ears of men?  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2918"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> A good conscience welcomes the crowd, but a bad conscience, even in solitude, is disturbed and troubled.  If your deeds are honourable, let everybody know them; if base, what matters it that no one knows them, as long as you yourself know them?  How wretched you are if you despise such a witness!  Farewell.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-491" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-493">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, Rome.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-492" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-494">↑</a></span> <span>Lucilius was at this time the imperial procurator in Sicily.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1059"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-2919" data-page-number="287" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/311" data-page-index="311" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/311"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
