<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-117" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CXII. ON REFORMING HARDENED SINNERS</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4883"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> I am indeed anxious that your friend be moulded and trained, according to your desire. But he has been taken in a very hardened state, or rather (and this is a more difficult problem), in a very soft state, broken down by bad and inveterate habits.
</p><p>I should like to give you an illustration from my own handicraft.<sup id="calibre_link-858" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-857" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4884"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> It is not every vine that admits the grafting process; if it be old and decayed, or if it be weak and slender, the vine either will not receive the cutting, or will not nourish it and make it a part of itself, nor will it accommodate itself to the qualities and nature of the grafted part. Hence we usually cut off the vine above ground, so that if we do not get results at first, we may try a second venture, and on a second trial graft it below the ground.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4885"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> Now this person, concerning whom you have sent me your message in writing, has no strength; for he has pampered his vices. He has at one and the same time become flabby and hardened. He cannot receive reason, nor can he nourish it. “But,” you say, “he desires reason of his own free will.” Don’t believe him. Of course I do not mean that he is lying to you; for he really thinks that he desires it. Luxury has merely upset his stomach; he will soon become reconciled to it again. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4886"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> “But he says that he is put out with his former way of living.” Very likely. Who is not? Men love and hate their vices at the same time. It will be the proper season to pass judgment on him when he has given us a <span><span id="calibre_link-4887" data-page-number="283" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/295" data-page-index="295" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/295"></span></span>guarantee that he really hates luxury; as it is now, luxury and he are merely not on speaking terms. Farewell.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-857" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-858">↑</a></span> <span>Seneca was an extensive and prosperous vine-grower. Compare <i>Ep.</i> civ. 6 f. for his description of his hobby at the country-place near Nomentum. There are many figures which deal with the vine scattered through the Letters.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1214"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-4888" data-page-number="283" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/295" data-page-index="295" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/295"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
