<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XII. ON OLD AGE</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2435"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> Wherever I turn, I see evidences of my advancing years.  I visited lately my country-place, and protested against the money which was spent on the tumble-down building.  My bailiff maintained that the flaws were not due to his own carelessness; “he was doing everything possible, but the house was old.” And this was the house which grew under my own hands! What has the future in store for <span><span id="calibre_link-2436" data-page-number="67" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/91" data-page-index="91" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/91"></span></span>me, if stones of my own age are already crumbling?  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2437"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> I was angry, and I embraced the first opportunity to vent my spleen in the bailiff’s presence. “It is clear,” I cried, “that these plane-trees are neglected; they have no leaves.  Their branches are so gnarled and shrivelled; the boles are so rough and unkempt!  This would not happen, if someone loosened the earth at their feet, and watered them.” The bailiff swore by my protecting deity that “he was doing everything possible, and never relaxed his efforts, but those trees were old.” Between you and me, I had planted those trees myself, I had seen them in their first leaf.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2438"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> Then I turned to the door and asked: “Who is that broken-down dotard?  You have done well to place him at the entrance; for he is outward bound.<sup id="calibre_link-1808" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1798" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> Where did you get him? What pleasure did it give you to take up for burial some other man’s dead?<sup id="calibre_link-1809" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1799" type="noteref"><span>[</span>2<span>]</span></a></sup>” But the slave said: “Don’t you know me, sir?  I am Felicio; you used to bring me little images.<sup id="calibre_link-1810" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1800" type="noteref"><span>[</span>3<span>]</span></a></sup> My father was Philositus the steward, and I am your pet slave.” “The man is clean crazy,” I remarked. “Has my pet slave become a little boy again?  But it is quite possible; his teeth are just dropping out.”<sup id="calibre_link-1811" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1801" type="noteref"><span>[</span>4<span>]</span></a></sup>
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2439"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> I owe it to my country-place that my old age became apparent whithersoever I turned.  Let us cherish and love old age; for it is full of pleasure if one knows how to use it.  Fruits are most welcome when almost over; youth is most charming at its close; the last drink delights the toper,&mdash;the glass which souses him and puts the finishing touch on his drunkenness.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2440"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> Each pleasure reserves to the end the greatest delights which it contains.  Life is most delightful when it is on the downward slope, but has not yet reached the abrupt decline.  And I myself believe that the period which stands, so to <span><span id="calibre_link-2441" data-page-number="69" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/93" data-page-index="93" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/93"></span></span>speak, on the edge of the roof, possesses pleasures of its own.  Or else the very fact of our not wanting pleasures has taken the place of the pleasures themselves.  How comforting it is to have tired out one’s appetites, and to have done with them! <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2442"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">6.</b></sup></span> “But,” you say, “it is a nuisance to be looking death in the face!” Death, however, should be looked in the face by young and old alike.  We are not summoned according to our rating on the censor’s list.<sup id="calibre_link-1812" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1802" type="noteref"><span>[</span>5<span>]</span></a></sup> Moreover, no one is so old that it would be improper for him to hope for another day of existence.  And one day, mind you, is a stage on life’s journey.
</p><p>Our span of life is divided into parts; it consists of large circles enclosing smaller.  One circle embraces and bounds the rest; it reaches from birth to the last day of existence.  The next circle limits the period of our young manhood.  The third confines all of childhood in its circumference.  Again, there is, in a class by itself, the year; it contains within itself all the divisions of time by the multiplication of which we get the total of life.  The month is bounded by a narrower ring. The smallest circle of all is the day; but even a day has its beginning and its ending, its sunrise and its sunset.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2443"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">7.</b></sup></span> Hence Heraclitus, whose obscure style gave him his surname,<sup id="calibre_link-1813" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1803" type="noteref"><span>[</span>6<span>]</span></a></sup> remarked: “One day is equal to every day.” Different persons have interpreted the saying in different ways.  Some hold that days are equal in number of hours, and this is true; for if by “day” we mean twenty-four hours’ time, all days must be equal, inasmuch as the night acquires what the day loses.  But others maintain that one day is equal to all days through resemblance, because the very longest space of time possesses no element which cannot be found in a single day,&mdash;namely, light and <span><span id="calibre_link-2444" data-page-number="71" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/95" data-page-index="95" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/95"></span></span>and darkness,&mdash;and even to eternity day makes these alternations<sup id="calibre_link-1814" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1804" type="noteref"><span>[</span>7<span>]</span></a></sup> more numerous, not different when it is shorter and different again when it is longer.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2445"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">8.</b></sup></span> Hence, every day ought to be regulated as if it closed the series, as if it rounded out and completed our existence.
</p><p>Pacuvius, who by long occupancy made Syria his own,<sup id="calibre_link-1815" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1805" type="noteref"><span>[</span>8<span>]</span></a></sup> used to hold a regular burial sacrifice in his own honour, with wine and the usual funeral feasting, and then would have himself carried from the dining-room to his chamber, while eunuchs applauded and sang in Greek to a musical accompaniment: “He has lived his life, he has lived his life!” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2446"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">9.</b></sup></span> Thus Pacuvius had himself carried out to burial every day.  Let us, however, do from a good motive what he used to do from a debased motive; let us go to our sleep with joy and gladness; let us say: 
</p>
<div class="wst-block-center">
<div class="wst-size-block">
<p class="calibre39">I have lived; the course which Fortune set for me<br class="calibre3" />
Is finished.<sup id="calibre_link-1816" class="reference1"><a href="#calibre_link-1806" type="noteref"><span>[</span>9<span>]</span></a></sup>
</p>
</div>
</div>
<p>And if God is pleased to add another day, we should welcome it with glad hearts.  That man is happiest, and is secure in his own possession of himself, who can await the morrow without apprehension. When a man has said: “I have lived!”, every morning he arises he receives a bonus.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2447"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">10.</b></sup></span> But now I ought to close my letter. “What?” you say; “shall it come to me without any little offering?” Be not afraid; it brings something,&mdash;nay, more than something, a great deal.  For what is more noble than the following saying<sup id="calibre_link-1817" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1807" type="noteref"><span>[</span>10<span>]</span></a></sup> of which I make this letter the bearer: “It is wrong to live under constraint; but no man is constrained to live under constraint.” Of course not.  On all sides lie <span><span id="calibre_link-2448" data-page-number="73" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/97" data-page-index="97" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/97"></span></span>many short and simple paths to freedom; and let us thank God that no man can be kept in life.  We may spurn the very constraints that hold us. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2449"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">11.</b></sup></span> “Epicurus,” you reply, “uttered these words; what are you doing with another’s property?” Any truth, I maintain, is my own property.  And I shall continue to heap quotations from Epicurus upon you, so that all persons who swear by the words of another, and put a value upon the speaker and not upon the thing spoken, may understand that the best ideas are common property. Farewell.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-1798" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1808">↑</a></span> <span>A jesting allusion to the Roman funeral; the corpse’s feet pointing towards the door.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1799" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1809">↑</a></span> <span>His former owner should have kept him and buried him.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1800" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1810">↑</a></span> <span>Small figures, generally of terra-cotta, were frequently given to children as presents at the Saturnalia.  <i>Cf.</i> Macrobius, i. 11. 49 <i>sigila</i> <span class="nowrap">.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</span> <i>pro se atque suis piaculum</i>.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1801" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1811">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, the old slave resembles a child in that he is losing his teeth (but for the second time).</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1802" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1812">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, <i>seniores</i>, as contrasted with <i>iuniores</i>.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1803" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1813">↑</a></span> <span><span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ὁ σκοτεινός</span>, “the Obscure,” Frag. 106 Diels².</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1804" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1814">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, of light and darkness.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1805" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1815">↑</a></span> <span><i>Usus</i> was the mere enjoyment of a piece of property; <i>dominium</i> was the exclusive right to its control.  Possession for one, or two, years conferred ownership.  See Leage, <i>Roman Private Law</i>, pp. 133, 152, and 164.  Although Pacuvius was governor so long that the province seemed to belong to him, yet he knew he might die any day.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1806" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1816">↑</a></span> <span>Vergil, <i>Aeneid</i>, iv. 653.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1807" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1817">↑</a></span> <span>Epicurus, <i>Sprüche</i>, 9 Wokte.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1091"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-2450" data-page-number="73" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/97" data-page-index="97" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/97"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
