<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-48" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XLVI. ON A NEW BOOK BY LUCILIUS</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2948"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> I received the book of yours which you promised me.  I opened it hastily with the idea of glancing over it at leisure; for I meant only to taste the volume.  But by its own charm the book coaxed me into traversing it more at length.  You may understand from this fact how eloquent it was; for it seemed to be written in the smooth style,<sup id="calibre_link-2205" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-2204" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> and yet did not resemble your handiwork or mine, but at first sight might have been ascribed to Titus Livius or to Epicurus.  Moreover, I was so impressed and carried along by its charm that I finished it without <span><span id="calibre_link-2949" data-page-number="301" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/325" data-page-index="325" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/325"></span></span>any postponement.  The sunlight called to me, hunger warned, and clouds were lowering; but I absorbed the book from beginning to end.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2950"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> I was not merely pleased; I rejoiced.  So full of wit and spirit it was!  I should have added “force,” had the book contained moments of repose, or had it risen to energy only at intervals.  But I found that there was no burst of force, but an even flow, a style that was vigorous and chaste.  Nevertheless I noticed from time to time your sweetness, and here and there that mildness of yours.  Your style is lofty and noble; I want you to keep to this manner and this direction.  Your subject also contributed something; for this reason you should choose productive topics, which will lay hold of the mind and arouse it.  
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2951"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> I shall discuss the book more fully after a second perusal; meantime, my judgment is somewhat unsettled, just as if I had heard it read aloud, and had not read it myself.  You must allow me to examine it also.  You need not be afraid; you shall hear the truth. Lucky fellow, to offer a man no opportunity to tell you lies at such long range!  Unless perhaps, even now, when excuses for lying are taken away, custom serves as an excuse for our telling each other lies!  Farewell.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-2204" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-2205">↑</a></span> <span>Possibly <i>levis</i> in the sense of <i>light</i>, referring to size.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1183"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt5" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-2952" data-page-number="301" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/325" data-page-index="325" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/325"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
