<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-101" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XCVI. ON FACING HARDSHIPS</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4504"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> Spite of all do you still chafe and complain, not understanding that, in all the evils to which you refer, there is really only one&mdash;the fact that you <i>do</i> chafe and complain? If you ask me, I think that for a <i>man</i> there is no misery unless there be something in the universe which he thinks miserable. I shall not endure myself on that day when I find anything unendurable. 
</p><p>I am ill; but that is a part of my lot. My slaves have fallen sick, my income has gone off, my house is rickety, I have been assailed by losses, accidents, toil, and fear; this is a common thing. Nay, that was an understatement; it was an inevitable thing. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4505"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> Such affairs come by order, and not by accident. If you will believe me, it is my inmost emotions that I am just now disclosing to you: when everything seems to go hard and uphill, I have trained myself not merely to obey God, but to agree with His <span><span id="calibre_link-4506" data-page-number="107" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/119" data-page-index="119" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/119"></span></span>decisions. I follow Him because my soul wills it, and not because I must.<sup id="calibre_link-511" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-510" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> Nothing will ever happen to me that I shall receive with ill humour or with a wry face. I shall pay up all my taxes willingly. Now all the things which cause us to groan or recoil, are part of the tax of life&mdash;things, my dear Lucilius, which you should never hope and never seek to escape. 
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4507"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> It was disease of the bladder that made you apprehensive; downcast letters came from you; you were continually getting worse; I will touch the truth more closely, and say that you feared for your life. But come, did you not know, when you prayed for long life, that this was what you were praying for? A long life includes all these troubles, just as a long journey includes dust and mud and rain. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4508"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> “But,” you cry, “I wished to live, and at the same time to be immune from all ills.” Such a womanish cry does no credit to a man. Consider in what attitude you shall receive this prayer of mine (I offer it not only in a good, but in a noble spirit): “May gods and goddesses alike forbid that Fortune keep you in luxury!” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4509"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> Ask yourself voluntarily which you would choose if some god gave you the choice&mdash;life in a café or life in a camp. 
</p><p>And yet life, Lucilius, is really a battle. For this reason those who are tossed about at sea, who proceed uphill and downhill over toilsome crags and heights, who go on campaigns that bring the greatest danger, are heroes and front-rank fighters; but persons who live in rotten luxury and ease while others toil, are mere turtle-doves&mdash;safe only because men despise them. Farewell.
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-510" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-511">↑</a></span> <span><i>Cf.</i> the words <i>ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trahunt</i> of <i>Ep.</i> cvii. 11.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1103"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-4510" data-page-number="109" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/121" data-page-index="121" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/121"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
