<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-67" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>LXV. ON THE FIRST CAUSE</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3265"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> I shared my time yesterday with ill health;<sup id="calibre_link-1746" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1732" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> it claimed for itself all the period before noon; in the afternoon, however, it yielded to me.  And so I first tested my spirit by reading; then, when reading was found to be possible, I dared to make more demands upon the spirit, or perhaps I should say, to make more concessions to it.  I wrote a little, and indeed with more concentration than usual, for I am struggling with a difficult subject and do not wish to be downed.  In the midst of this, some friends visited me, with the purpose of employing force and of restraining me, as if I were a sick man indulging in some excess.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3266"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> So conversation was substituted for writing; and from this conversation I shall communicate to you the topic which is still the subject of debate; for we have appointed you referee.<sup id="calibre_link-1747" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1733" type="noteref"><span>[</span>2<span>]</span></a></sup> You have more of a task on your hands than you suppose, for the argument is threefold.
</p><p>Our Stoic philosophers, as you know, declare that there are two things in the universe which are the source of everything,&mdash;namely, cause and matter.<sup id="calibre_link-1748" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1734" type="noteref"><span>[</span>3<span>]</span></a></sup> Matter lies sluggish, a substance ready for any use, but sure to remain unemployed if no one sets it in motion.  Cause, however, by which we mean reason, moulds matter and turns it in whatever direction it will, producing thereby various concrete results.  Accordingly, there must be, in the case of each thing, that from which it is made, and, next, an agent by which it is made.  The former is its material, the latter its cause.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3267"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> All art is but imitation of nature; therefore, let me apply these statements of general principles to <span><span id="calibre_link-3268" data-page-number="447" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/471" data-page-index="471" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/471"></span></span>the things which have to be made by man.  A statue, for example, has afforded matter which was to undergo treatment at the hands of the artist, and has had an artist who was to give form to the matter.  Hence, in the case of the statue, the material was bronze, the cause was the workman. And so it goes with all things,&mdash;they consist of that which is made, and of the maker.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3269"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> The Stoics believe in one cause only,&mdash;the maker; but Aristotle thinks that the word “cause” can be used in three ways: “The first cause,” he says, “is the actual matter, without which nothing can be created.  The second is the workman.  The third is the form, which is impressed upon every work,&mdash;a statue, for example.” This last is what Aristotle calls the <i>idos</i>.<sup id="calibre_link-1749" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1735" type="noteref"><span>[</span>4<span>]</span></a></sup> “There is, too,” says he, “a fourth,&mdash;the purpose of the work as a whole.” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3270"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> Now I shall show you what this last means.  Bronze is the “first cause” of the statue, for it could never have been made unless there had been something from which it could be cast and moulded.  The “second cause” is the artist; for without the skilled hands of a workman that bronze could not have been shaped to the outlines of the statue.  The “third cause” is the form, inasmuch as our statue could never be called The Lance-Bearer or The Boy Binding his Hair,<sup id="calibre_link-1750" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1736" type="noteref"><span>[</span>5<span>]</span></a></sup> had not this special shape been stamped upon it.  The “fourth cause” is the purpose of the work.  For if this purpose had not existed, the statue would not have been made.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3271"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">6.</b></sup></span> Now what is this purpose?  It is that which attracted the artist, which he followed when he made the statue.  It may have been money, if he has made it for sale; or renown, if he has worked for reputation; or religion, if he has wrought it as a gift for a temple.  Therefore this also is a cause contributing towards the making of the statue; <span><span id="calibre_link-3272" data-page-number="449" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/473" data-page-index="473" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/473"></span></span>or do you think that we should avoid including, among the causes of a thing which has been made, that element without which the thing in question would not have been made?
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3273"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">7.</b></sup></span> To these four Plato adds a fifth cause,&mdash;the pattern which he himself calls the “idea"; for it is this that the artist gazed upon<sup id="calibre_link-1751" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1737" type="noteref"><span>[</span>6<span>]</span></a></sup> when he created the work which he had decided to carry out.  Now it makes no difference whether he has his pattern outside himself, that he may direct his glance to it, or within himself, conceived and placed there by himself.  God has within himself these patterns of all things, and his mind comprehends the harmonies and the measures of the whole totality of things which are to be carried out; he is filled with these shapes which Plato calls the “ideas,”&mdash;imperishable, unchangeable, not subject to decay. And therefore, though men die, humanity itself, or the idea of man, according to which man is moulded, lasts on, and though men toil and perish, it suffers no change.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3274"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">8.</b></sup></span> Accordingly, there are five causes, as Plato says:<sup id="calibre_link-1752" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1738" type="noteref"><span>[</span>7<span>]</span></a></sup> the material, the agent, the make-up, the model, and the end in view.  Last comes the result of all these.  Just as in the case of the statue,&mdash;to go back to the figure with which we began,&mdash;the material is the bronze, the agent is the artist, the make-up is the form which is adapted to the material, the model is the pattern imitated by the agent, the end in view is the purpose in the maker’s mind, and, finally, the result of all these is the statue itself.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3275"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">9.</b></sup></span> The universe also, in Plato’s opinion, possesses all these elements.  The agent is God; the source, matter; the form, the shape and the arrangement of the visible world.  The pattern is doubtless the model according to which God has made this great and most beautiful <span><span id="calibre_link-3276" data-page-number="451" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/475" data-page-index="475" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/475"></span></span>creation.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3277"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">10.</b></sup></span> The purpose is his object in so doing.  Do you ask what God’s purpose is?  It is goodness.  Plato, at any rate, says: “What was God’s reason for creating the world?  God is good, and no good person is grudging of anything that is good.  Therefore, God made it the best world possible.” Hand down your opinion, then, O judge; state who seems to you to say what is truest, and not who says what is absolutely true.  For to do that is as far beyond our ken as truth itself.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3278"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">11.</b></sup></span> This throng of causes, defined by Aristotle and by Plato, embraces either too much or too little.<sup id="calibre_link-1753" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1739" type="noteref"><span>[</span>8<span>]</span></a></sup> For if they regard as “causes” of an object that is to be made everything without which the object cannot be made, they have named too few.  Time must be included among the causes; for nothing can be made without time.  They must also include place; for if there be no place where a thing can be made, it will not be made.  And motion too; nothing is either made or destroyed without motion. There is no art without motion, no change of any kind.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3279"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">12.</b></sup></span> Now, however, I am searching for the first, the general cause; this must be simple, inasmuch as matter, too, is simple.  Do we ask what cause is?  It is surely Creative Reason,<sup id="calibre_link-1754" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1740" type="noteref"><span>[</span>9<span>]</span></a></sup>&mdash;in other words, God.  For those elements to which you referred are not a great series of independent causes; they all hinge on one alone, and that will be the creative cause.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3280"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">13.</b></sup></span> Do you maintain that form is a cause? This is only what the artist stamps upon his work; it is part of a cause, but not the cause.  Neither is the pattern a cause, but an indispensable tool of the cause.  His pattern is as <span><span id="calibre_link-3281" data-page-number="453" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/477" data-page-index="477" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/477"></span></span>indispensable to the artist as the chisel or the file; without these, art can make no progress.  But for all that, these things are neither parts of the art, nor causes of it. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3282"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">14.</b></sup></span> “Then,” perhaps you will say, “the purpose of the artist, that which leads him to undertake to create something, is the cause.” It may be a cause; it is not, however, the efficient cause, but only an accessory cause.  But there are countless accessory causes; what we are discussing is the general cause.  Now the statement of Plato and Aristotle is not in accord with their usual penetration, when they maintain that the whole universe, the perfectly wrought work, is a cause. For there is a great difference between a work and the cause of a work.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3283"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">15.</b></sup></span> Either give your opinion, or, as is easier in cases of this kind, declare that the matter is not clear and call for another hearing.<sup id="calibre_link-1755" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1741" type="noteref"><span>[</span>10<span>]</span></a></sup> But you will reply: “What pleasure do you get from wasting your time on these problems, which relieve you of none of your emotions, rout none of your desires?” So far as I am concerned, I treat and discuss them as matters which contribute greatly toward calming the spirit, and I search myself first, and then the world about me.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3284"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">16.</b></sup></span> And not even now am I, as you think, wasting my time.  For all these questions, provided that they be not chopped up and torn apart into such unprofitable refinements, elevate and lighten the soul, which is weighted down by a heavy burden and desires to be freed and to return to the elements of which it was once a part.  For this body of ours is a weight upon the soul and its penance; as the load presses down the soul is crushed and is in bondage, unless philosophy has come to its assistance and has bid it take fresh courage by contemplating the <span><span id="calibre_link-3285" data-page-number="455" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/479" data-page-index="479" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/479"></span></span>universe, and has turned it from things earthly to things divine.  There it has its liberty, there it can roam abroad;<sup id="calibre_link-1756" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1742" type="noteref"><span>[</span>11<span>]</span></a></sup> meantime it escapes the custody in which it is bound, and renews its life in heaven.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3286"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">17.</b></sup></span> Just as skilled workmen, who have been engaged upon some delicate piece of work which wearies their eyes with straining, if the light which they have is niggardly or uncertain, go forth into the open air and in some park devoted to the people’s recreation delight their eyes in the generous light of day; so the soul, imprisoned as it has been in this gloomy and darkened house, seeks the open sky whenever it can, and in the contemplation of the universe finds rest. 
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3287"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">18.</b></sup></span> The wise man, the seeker after wisdom, is bound closely, indeed, to his body, but he is an absentee so far as his better self is concerned, and he concentrates his thoughts upon lofty things.  Bound, so to speak, to his oath of allegiance, he regards the period of life as his term of service.  He is so trained that he neither loves nor hates life; he endures a mortal lot, although he knows that an ampler lot is in store for him.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3288"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">19.</b></sup></span> Do you forbid me to contemplate the universe?  Do you compel me to withdraw from the whole and restrict me to a part?  May I not ask what are the beginnings of all things, who moulded the universe, who took the confused and conglomerate mass of sluggish matter, and separated it into its parts?  May I not inquire who is the Master-Builder of this universe, how the mighty bulk was brought under the control of law and order, who gathered together the scattered atoms, who separated the disordered elements and assigned an outward form to elements that lay in one vast shapelessness?  Or whence came all the expanse of light?  And whether is it fire, or <span><span id="calibre_link-3289" data-page-number="457" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/481" data-page-index="481" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/481"></span></span>something even brighter than fire?<sup id="calibre_link-1757" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1743" type="noteref"><span>[</span>12<span>]</span></a></sup>  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3290"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">20.</b></sup></span> Am I not to ask these questions?  Must I be ignorant of the heights whence I have descended?  Whether I am to see this world but once, or to be born many times?  What is my destination afterwards? What abode awaits my soul on its release from the laws of slavery among men?  Do you forbid me to have a share in heaven?  In other words, do you bid me live with my head bowed down?  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3291"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">21.</b></sup></span> No, I am above such an existence; I was born to a greater destiny than to be a mere chattel of my body, and I regard this body as nothing but a chain<sup id="calibre_link-1758" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1744" type="noteref"><span>[</span>13<span>]</span></a></sup> which manacles my freedom.  Therefore, I offer it as a sort of buffer to fortune, and shall allow no wound to penetrate through to my soul.  For my body is the only part of me which can suffer injury.  In this dwelling, which is exposed to peril, my soul lives free.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3292"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">22.</b></sup></span> Never shall this flesh drive me to feel fear, or to assume any pretence that is unworthy of a good man.  Never shall I lie in order to honour this petty body.  When it seems proper, I shall sever my connexion with it.  And at present, while we are bound together, our alliance shall nevertheless not be one of equality; the soul shall bring all quarrels before its own tribunal.  To despise our bodies is sure freedom. 
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3293"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">23.</b></sup></span> To return to our subject; this freedom will be greatly helped by the contemplation of which we were just speaking.  All things are made up of matter and of God;<sup id="calibre_link-1759" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1745" type="noteref"><span>[</span>14<span>]</span></a></sup>  God controls matter, which encompasses him and follows him as its guide and leader.  And that which creates, in other words, God, is more powerful and precious than matter, which is acted upon by God.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-3294"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">24.</b></sup></span> God’s place in the <span><span id="calibre_link-3295" data-page-number="459" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/483" data-page-index="483" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/483"></span></span>universe corresponds to the soul’s relation to man.  World-matter corresponds to our mortal body; therefore let the lower serve the higher.  Let us be brave in the face of hazards.  Let us not fear wrongs, or wounds, or bonds, or poverty.  And what is death?  It is either the end, or a process of change. I have no fear of ceasing to exist; it is the same as not having begun. Nor do I shrink from changing into another state, because I shall, under no conditions, be as cramped as I am now.  Farewell.
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div><span about="#mwt4">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-1732" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1746">↑</a></span> <span>For Seneca’s troubles in this regard see also <i>Epp.</i> liv. and civ.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1733" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1747">↑</a></span> <span>The <i>arbiter</i> was a judge appointed to try a case according to <i>bona fides</i> (equity), as contrasted with the <i>iudex</i> proper, whose duty was defined by the magistrate.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1734" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1748">↑</a></span> <span>See Zeller’s <i>Stoics</i> (translated by Reichel), pp. 139 ff.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1735" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1749">↑</a></span> <span>The statue figure is a frequent one in philosophy; <i>cf.</i> <i>Ep.</i> ix. 5.  The “form” of Aristotle goes back to the “idea” of Plato.  These four causes are the causes of Aristotle, matter (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ὕλη</span>), form (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">εἶδος</span>), force (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">τὸ κινοῦν</span>), and the end (<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">τὸ τέλος</span>); when they all concur, we pass from possibility to fact.  Aristotle gives eight categories in <i>Phys.</i> 225 b 5; and ten in <i>Categ.</i> 1 b 25,&mdash;substance, quantity, quality, relation, place, time, situation, possession, action, passion.  For a definition of <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">εἶδος</span> see Aristotle, <i>Phys</i> 190 b 20 <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">γίγνεται πᾶν ἔκ τε τοῦ ὑποκειμένου καὶ τῆς μορφῆς</span> (<i>i.e.</i> <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">τοῦ εἴδους</span>).</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1736" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1750">↑</a></span> <span>Well-known works of Polyclitus, fifth century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span></span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1737" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1751">↑</a></span> <span>Explaining the derivation of the Greek word,&mdash;<span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">ιδεῖν</span>, “to behold.”  For a discussion of Plato’s “ideas,” those “independent, separate, self-existing, perfect, and eternal essences” (<i>Republic</i> vi. and vii.) see Adam, <i>The Republic of Plato</i>, ii. 168-179.  According to Adam, Plato owes his theory of ideas to Socrates, the Eleatics, and the study of geometry; but his debt is not so great as his discovery.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1738" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1752">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, the four categories as established by Aristotle, plus the “idea” of Plato.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1739" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1753">↑</a></span> <span>The Stoic view (see § 2 of this letter), besides making the four categories of “substance,” “form,” “variety,” and “variety of relation,” regarded material things as the only things which possessed being.  The Stoics thus differ from Aristotle and Plato in holding that nothing is real except matter; besides, they relate everything to one ultimate cause, the acting force or efficient cause.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1740" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1754">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, the <span class="wst-lang" dir="ltr" lang="grc">λόγος σπερματικός</span>, the creative force in nature, that is, Providence, or the will of Zeus.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1741" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1755">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, restate the question and hear the evidence again.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1742" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1756">↑</a></span> <span>According to the Stoics the soul, which consisted of fire or breath and was a part of the divine essence, rose at death into the ether and became one with the stars.  Seneca elsewhere (<i>Consolatio ad Marciam</i>) states that the soul went through a sort of purifying process,&mdash;a view which may have had some influence on Christian thought.  The souls of the good, the Stoics maintained, were destined to last until the end of the world, the souls of the bad to be extinguished before that time.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1743" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1757">↑</a></span> <span>The sequence of elements from the earth outwards and upwards was earth, water, air, and fire.  The upper fire was ether.  Zeno (quoted by Cicero, <i>Acad.</i> i. 11. 39) refused to acknowledge a fifth essence: <i>statuebat enim ignem esse ipsam naturam, quae quaeque gigneret, et mentem et sensus</i>.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1744" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1758">↑</a></span> <span>The “prison of the body” is a frequent figure in Stoic as in all philosophy.  See, for example, § 16 of this letter, “the soul in bondage.”</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-1745" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1759">↑</a></span> <span>A restatement of the previous remark made in this letter; see note on § 11.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<hr class="wst-rule" about="#mwt5" />
<div class="reflist1" about="#mwt7" typeof="mw:Transclusion">
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt8"></ol>
</div>
<link rel="mw:PageProp/Language" href="https://la.wikisource.org/wiki/Epistulae%20morales%20ad%20Lucilium/Liber%20VII#LXV." class="calibre8" /></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-1193"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div about="#mwt4" class="calibre3">
<table class="multicol">
<tbody class="calibre21"><tr class="__toc_row_first-c">
<td class="calibre41">
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre18">Volume I.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt8" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-3296" data-page-number="461" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/485" data-page-index="485" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/485"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre38">INDEX OF PROPER NAMES</span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Academic</span> School of Philosophy, its lofty ideals, xxix. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">L. Accius (Roman poet, 2nd century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), lviii. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Acheron (the lake), lv. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aelius Sejanus (prime minister of Tiberius), dangers of acquaintance with, lv. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aetna, celebrated by poets, li. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Alexander the Great (356&ndash;323 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), sayings of, liii. 10, lix. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aristo (of Chios, Stoic philosopher, 3rd century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), saying of, xxxvi. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aristo (philosopher, identity unknown), anecdotes of, xxix. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aristotle (384&ndash;322 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), debt to Socrates, vi. 6; on genus and species, lviii. 9; on cause, form, matter, etc., lxv. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Asinius Gallus (son of Asinius Pollio), dangers of friendship with, lv. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Athenodorus (of Tarsus, librarian at Pergamus, friend of Cato), on frankness toward the gods, x. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Athens, visited by wise men from the East, lviii. 31</li>
<li class="calibre43">Attalus (Stoic philosopher, teacher of Seneca), on friendship, ix. 7; on the memory of lost friends, lxiii. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">T. Pomponius Atticus, made immortal by Cicero's correspondence, xxi. 4</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Baba</span> and Isio, futility of, xv. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Baiae, luxuries of, li. 1 ff., lv. <i>passim</i>, lvii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aufidius Bassus (perhaps the historian whose work the Elder Pliny continued, see Plin. <i>Ep.</i> iii. 5. 6), illness of, xxx. 1 ff.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">C. Julius Caesar</span>, hostility to Cato, xiv. 12 f., xxiv. 8; villas of, li. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gaius Caesar (Caligula), slain by Chaerea, iv. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Callistus (a favourite of the Emperor Claudius), disdains his former master, xlvii. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Campania, thoughts inspired <span><span id="calibre_link-3297" data-page-number="462" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/486" data-page-index="486" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/486"></span></span>by the sight of, xlix. 1; its effect upon Hannibal, li. 5; home-sickness for, lv. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Candavian desert, xxxi. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Canopus, vices of, li. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Porcius Cato (the Censor), effect of the mob upon, vii. 6; model for good conduct, xi. 10, xxv. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Cato (the younger), his glory, xiii. 14; bravery, xiv. 12 ff.; last moments, xxiv. 6 ff.; scorn of loose living, li. 12; as <i>species</i>, lviii. 12; deserving of honour, lxiv. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cerberus, false ideas concerning, xxiv. 18 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chaerea, Cassius, murderer of Caligula, iv. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Charinus, archon at Athens, xviii. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chrysippus (successor of Cleanthes as head of the Stoic school), saying of, ix. 14; advice of, xxii. 11, xxxiii. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chrysippus (unknown), victim of greetings, lvi. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cicero, his tribute to philosophy, xvii. 2; confers immortality upon Atticus, xxi. 4; his deliberate speech, xl. 11; his opinion of the lyric poets, xlix. 5; on the use of <i>essentia</i>, lviii. 6; as species, lviii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cleanthes (successor of Zeno as head of the Stoic school),!disciple of Zeno, vi. 6; dicta of, xxxiii. 4 ff.; his humble station, xliv. 3; object of veneration, lxiv. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Licinius Crassus (the triumvir), death of, iv. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Crates (of Thebes, Cynic philosopher c. 300 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), his advice to a young man, x. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Croesus, captivity of, xlvii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cumae, lv. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cynic School of Philosophy, its high standards, xxix. 11; free speech, xxix. 1</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Darius</span>, the mother of, in captivity, xlvii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Demetrius Poliorcetes (acquired control of Athens 307 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), conversation of, ix. 18 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Demetrius (of Sunium), consistent simplicity of, xx. 9; companion of Seneca, lxii. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Democritus (Greek atomic philosopher, 5th and 4th centuries <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on the importance of the individual, vii. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Dexter (the tribune who executed Lepidus), iv. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Diogenes (Cynic philosopher, 4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), his free speech, xxix. 1; slavery, xlvii. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Egyptians</span>, customs of bandits among the, li. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Ennius (Roman poet, 239&ndash;169 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), lviii. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Epicurean, the spirit of an, xlviii. 1 <span><span id="calibre_link-3298" data-page-number="463" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/487" data-page-index="487" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/487"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">Epicurus (founder of the school, 342-279 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), his influence, vi. 6, xxi. 3; self-denial, xviii. 6 ff.; addressed, xx. 11; confers glory, xxi. 3 ff.; wide application of his sayings, viii. 8, xxi. 9, xxxiii. 2; arguments concerning mythology, xxiv. 18; bravery, xxxiii. 2; Lucilius' style resembles his, xlvi. 1; quoted, ii. 5 f., iv. 10, vii. 11, viii. 7, ix. 1 and 20, xi. 8, xii. 10, xiii. 16, xiv. 17, xv. 9, xvi. 7, xvii. 11, xviii. 14, xix. 10, xx. 9, xxi. 3 ff., xxii. 6 and 14, xxiii. 9, xxiv. 22 ff., xxv. 5 f., xxvi. 8, xxvii. 9, xxviii. 9, xxix. 10, xxx. 14, lii. 3 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Euripides, quoted, xlix. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Papirius Fabianus</span> (an adviser and teacher of Seneca), his modesty, xi. 4; deliberate style, xl. 12; calmness of his audience, lii. 11; authority for the use of the word <i>essentia</i>, lviii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Felicio, pet slave of Seneca, son of Philositus, xii. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Flaccus (friend of Lucilius), death of, lxiii. 1 ff.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Germany</span>, training of children in, xxxvi. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Julius Graecinus (man of noble character, slain by Caligula), witticism of, xxix. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Graian Alps, xxxi. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Greeks, the word <i>oestrus</i> used by, lviii. 2; proverbs and maxims of, xxxiii. 7; headlong style of, xl. 11; as species of <i>man</i>, lviii. 12; their idea of <i>the</i> poet, lviii. 17</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Hannibal</span>, weakened by Campanian luxuries, li. 5 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Harpaste, blindness of, 1. 2 f. Q. Haterius (orator of the Early Empire), rapidity of, xl. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hecato (a philosopher of Rhodes and pupil of Panaetius, <i>c.</i> 100 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on hope and fear, v. 7; on self-knowledge, vi. 7; on love, ix. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hecuba (Queen of Troy), captivity of, xlvii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Heraclitus (philosopher of Ephesus, <i>c.</i> 500 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), sayings of, xii. 7, lviii. 23</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hermarchus (successor of Epicurus as head of the school), close adherence to Epicurus, vi. 6; dicta of, xxxiii. 4; a philosopher of the third grade, lii. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Herodotus (Greek historian, 5th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), reminiscence of, vi. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hesiod, reminiscence of, i. 5; misquoted by Sabinus. xxvii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Homer, called the poet by the Greeks, lviii. 17; on the rapid and gentle styles, xl. 2; misquoted by Sabinus, xxvii. 6</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> <span><span id="calibre_link-3299" data-page-number="464" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/488" data-page-index="488" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/488"></span></span><div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Idomeneus</span> (prominent in state affairs and a contemporary of Epicurus), correspondence with Epicurus, xxi. 3 ff., xxii. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ixion, torments of, in the lower world, xxiv. 18 ff.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Jupiter</span>, amid the Stoic conflagration, ix. 16; happiness of, xxv. 4; popularly called the father of Alexander, lix. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Juvenal, compared, xiv. 9 n.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">C. Laelius</span> Sapiens (statesman and friend of Scipio the Younger), effect of the mob upon, vii. 6; a model for mankind, xxv. 6; worthy of honour, lxiv. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Latin Language, narrow limits of, lviii. <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Aemilius Lepidus (favourite of Caligula, slain by him <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span> 39), iv. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Liternum (town on sea-coast of Campania, near Cumae), abode of Scipio in exile, li. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">T. Livius (the historian, age of Augustus), comparison of his style with that of Lucilius, xlvi. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucilius, procurator in Sicily, xxxi. 9ff., li. 1; b. at Pompeii or Naples, xlix. 1; a Roman knight, xliv. 2 ff.; interested in philosophy, <i>passim</i>, esp. xl. 2; author, xlvi. 1; poetry of, viii. 10, xxiv.21. See Introduction, p. ix.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucretius (Roman poet, 1st century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), as species of man, lvili. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Maecenas</span>, character of, xix. 9 f.; quoted, <i>ib.</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Tullius Marcellinus (a friend of Seneca), faults of, xxix. 1 ff,</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Marius (rival of Sulla), the massacres of his epoch, xivii. 10; villas of, li. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Valerius Messala Corvinus (statesman and man of letters, b. 59 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) describes Aetna, li. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43"><i>Meta Sudans</i> (see <i>ad loc.</i>), the haunt of noisy pedlars, lvi. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Caecilius Metellus Numidicus (Roman general and statesman, retired into exile, 100 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), conduct in exile, xxiv. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Metrodorus (follower of Epicurus), vi. 6; xiv. 17; his simple life, xviii. 9; dicta, xxxiii. 4; a genius of the second grade, lii. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Mucius Scaevola (hero of Roman-Etruscan wars), puts his hand into the flames, xxiv. 5</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Naples</span>, memories of, xlix. 1; journey to, lvii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Ovidius Naso (Roman poet, age of Augustus), quoted, xxxiii. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Nesis (islet in the bay of Naples), liii. 1 <span><span id="calibre_link-3300" data-page-number="465" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/489" data-page-index="489" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/489"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">Nile, the distracting noise of its waters, lvi. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Niobe, restraint of, in her mourning, lxiii. 2</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Pacuvius</span> (a vice-governor of Syria under Tiberius), mock-funerals of, xii. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Panaetius (head of Stoic school, 2nd century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), dicta assigned to, xxxiii. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parthenope (another name for Naples), favourite place of Lucilius, liii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parthia, kings of, xvii. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parthian, allusion to the defeat and death of Crassus, 53 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, iv. 7; training of</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parthian children, xxxvi. 7; as <i>species</i> of man, lviii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pennine Alps, xxxi. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Peripatetics, their dislike for the common herd, xxix. 11; referred to in jest, <i>ibid.</i> 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Persians, bravery of, xxxiii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Phidias, the sculptor, ix. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Plato (Athenian philosopher, 428-347 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>), debt to Socrates, vi. 6; read by Cato, xxiv. 6; ennobled by philosophy, xliv. 3f.; captive, xlvii. 12; theory of ideas, lxv. 7; worthy of honour, lxiv. 10; on being, lviii. 1 and <i>passim</i>; quoted, xliv. 4 and <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Polyaenus (correspondent of Epicurus), influence of Epicurus upon, vi. 6, xviii. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Polyclitus (Greek sculptor, 5th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), works of, lxv. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pompeii, probable home of Lucilius, xlix. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pompeius (the triumvir), his shyness, xi. 4; death, iv. 7; villas, li. 11; disagrees with Cato, xiv. 12 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pomponius (possibly Pomponius Secundus, a contemporary of Seneca, writer of tragedies and letters), iii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Porsenna (Etruscan king), encounter with Mucius, xxiv. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Posidonius (Stoic philosopher, pupil of Panaetius and friend of Cicero), dicta assigned to, xxxili. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43"><i>Prometheus</i>, title of a work of Maecenas, xix. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Publilius Syrus (writer of farces and mimes, 1st century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), greatness of, viii. 8 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Puteoli (near Naples), voyage of Seneca to, liii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pythagoras (Greek philosopher, 6th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), rules of, lii. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pythocles, a friend of Idomeneus, xxi. 7 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Roman</span> style, dignity and slowness of, xl. 113</li>
<li class="calibre43">Romans as <i>species</i> of man, lviii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Rome, complicated life in, l. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Rutilius Rufus (orator and statesman, banished 92 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), exile of, xxiv. 4</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> <span><span id="calibre_link-3301" data-page-number="466" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/490" data-page-index="490" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/490"></span></span><div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Calvisius Sapinus</span> (a typical <i>parvenu)</i>, his illiteracy and bad taste, xxvii. 5 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sallust, compared, xx. 5; quoted, Ix. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Satellius Quadratus, ridicules Sabinus, xxvii. 7 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Saturnalia, description of the, xviii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Mamercus Aemilius Scaurus (prominent but unscrupulous statesman in the reign of Tiberius), witticism of, xxix. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio (Africanus Major), a model for mankind, xxv. 6; his exile at Liternum, li. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio (father-in-law of Pompey), heroism of, xxiv. 9 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">L. Annacus Seneca, <i>see</i> Introduction</li>
<li class="calibre43">Serapio (unknown), disordered utterances of, xl. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Annaeus Serenus (friend and possibly relative of Seneca; <i>praefectus vigilum</i> at Rome), loss of, lxiii. 14 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Sextius (the Elder), inspiring writings of, lxiv. 2 ff.; a simile of, lix. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sicily, Scylla, and Charybdis, dangers of, xiv. 8, xxxi. 9, xlvi. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sisyphus, punishedin Hades, xxiv. 18 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Socrates, inspiring personality of, vi. 6; effect of the mob upon, vii. 6; glory of, xiii. 14; his resignation, xxiv. 4; on globe-trotting, xxviii. 2; facing the Thirty Tyrants, xxviii. 8; humble birth, xliv. 3; worthy of reverence, lxiv. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sotion (the Pythagorean), recollections of, xlix. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Stilbo (Megarian philosopher and a strong influence on the Cynic and Stoic schools, <i>fl.</i> 4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), attacked by Epicurus, ix. 1 ff.&nbsp;; teacher of Crates, x. 1; quoted, ix. 18</li>
<li class="calibre43">Stoics (passim), agreement with Stilbo, ix. 19; boldness of their style, xiii. 4; their caution, xxii. 7; wise advice of their leaders, xxil. 11; their lofty aims, xxix. 11; free ideas, xxxiii. 4; theory on the fate of the soul at death, lvii. 7; definitions of the primary <i>genus</i>, lviii. 13 ff.; views on pleasure, lix. 1; on cause and matter, lxv. 2 and <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Sulla (dictator at Rome, 1st century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), anger of, xi. 4; disobeyed by Rutilius, xxiv. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Syria, governed by Pacuvius, xii. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Syrtes (quicksands), xxxi. 9</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Theophrastus</span> (successor of Aristotle as head of the Peripatetic School), views on friendship, iii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tiberius (Roman emperor, 14&ndash;37 <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span>), mentioned with other royal connexions of Atticus, xxi. 4 <span><span id="calibre_link-3302" data-page-number="467" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/491" data-page-index="491" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/491"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">Timon, dinners like those of, xviii. 7</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Ulysses</span>, temptations of, xxxi. 2&nbsp;; vietim of seasickness, liii. 4&nbsp;; remedy against Siren Songs, lvi. 15</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">C. Valgius Rufus</span> (Roman poet, b. 81 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), describes Aetna, ii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Terentius Varro (surnamed Atacinus, Latin poet, 83&ndash;37 B.C), quoted, vi. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Servilius Vatia (rich man of leisure in the early Empire), country-house of, lv. 2 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Vergilius Maro (Roman poet, 70&ndash;19 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), immortalizes Nisus and Euryalus, xx i. 5&nbsp;; the artisfs conception of, lviii. 20; mentioned in illustration of obsolete words, lviii. 2 ff.; quoted, xii. 9, xviii. 12, xxi. 5, xxviii. 1 and 3, xxxi. 11, xxxvii. 3, xli. 2, xlviii. 11, xlix. 7, liii. 3, lvi. 12, lviii. 2ff., lix. 17, lxiv. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Vinicius, ridiculed by Aseilius and Varius for his stammering, xl. 9 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Zeno</span> (founder of the Stoic school, <i>fl.</i> <i>c.</i> 300 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), model for Cleanthes, vi. 6; advice of, xxii. 11; dicta of, xxxiii. 4 ff.; object of veneration, lxiv. 10</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre10"><i>Printed in Great Britain by</i> R. &amp; R. <span class="smallcaps">Clark</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Limited</span>, <i>Edinburgh</i>.</span>
</p>
</div> 
</div></td>

<td class="multicol-break">
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre18">Volume II.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt12" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-3303" data-page-number="474" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/486" data-page-index="486" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/486"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre38">INDEX OF PROPER NAMES</span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Academic</span> (School of Philosophy), a definition of happiness, lxxi. 18; scepticism of, lxxxviii. 44 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Achaia (province of Greece), earthquakes in, xci. 9 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Achilles, age of, compared with that of Patroclus, lxxxviii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aegialus, a farmer on the old estate of Scipio, lxxxvi. 11 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aetna, proposed ascent of, by Lucilius, lxxix. 2 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Agamemnon, his desire to return home to Mycenae, lxvi. 26</li>
<li class="calibre43">Alexander of Macedon (the Great, <i>d.</i> 323 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), crimes and tragedy of, due to drink, lxxxiii. 19 ff.; his desire to conquer the globe, xci. 17</li>
<li class="calibre43">Alexandria, fast-sailing ships from, lxxvii. 1 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Anacharsis (Scythian philosopher, <i>fl.</i> 600 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), discussed as the inventor of the potter’s wheel, xc. 31</li>
<li class="calibre43">Antipater (of Tarsus, Stoic philosopher, 2nd century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), refutation of a Peripatetic syllogism, lxxxvii. 38 ff.; his view regarding non-essentials, xcii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Antonius (friend of Caesar and rival of Augustus), ruined by wine and Cleopatra, lxxxiii. 25</li>
<li class="calibre43">Apion (grammarian, 1st century <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span>), his opinion concerning the authorship of the Homeric cycle, lxxxviii. 10 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ardea (ancient city of Latium, capital of the Rutulians), capture of, xci. 16</li>
<li class="calibre43">Argos (kingdom in the Peloponnesus), a fictitious king of, lxxx. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aristo of Chius (Stoic, 3rd century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), weeds out many departments of philosophy, lxxxix. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">Asia, earthquakes in, xci. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Attalus (Stoic, teacher of Seneca), on the value of pain, lxvii. 15; simile used by, lxxii. 8; on “returning <span><span id="calibre_link-3304" data-page-number="475" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/487" data-page-index="487" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/487"></span></span>the chalice to our own lips,” lxxxi. 22</li>
<li class="calibre43">Augustus (Roman Emperor), confidence in the hard drinkers Piso and Cossus, lxxxiii. 14 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Decimus Junius Brutus</span> (<i>c.</i> 81&ndash;43 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, see <i>n.</i>), cowardly death of, lxxxii. 12 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Gaius Caesar</span> (Caligula, emperor 37&ndash;41 <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span>), witticism of, lxxvii. 18</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gaius Iulius Caesar, conqueror of Pompey, lxxxiii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cambyses (son of Cyrus the Great, king of the Medes and Persians, 6th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), madness of, lxxxvi. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Capreae (modern Capri, the outpost of the bay of Naples), lxxvii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gaius Cassius (one of the murderers of Caesar), temperate habits of lxxxiii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Porcius Cato (the Elder), simple life of, lxxxvi. 10; his scorn of trappings, lxxxvii. 9 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Porcius Cato (the Younger, <i>d.</i> 46 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), heroic suicide of, lxvii. 7, 13; lxx. 19, 22; defeat of, lxxi. 8, 10, 11; obedience to fate, lxxi. 16 f.; dictum of, lxxi. 15.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Charondas (Sicilian law-giver, 6th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), xc. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Charybdis (between Italy and Sicily, opposite to Scylla), phenomena of, lxxix. 1 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chelidon (a eunuch of Cleopatra), richness of, lxxxvii. 16</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tillius Cimber (one of the conspirators against Caesar), his inordinate love of liquor, lxxxiii. 12 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Claranus (a friend of Seneca), his heroic conduct during illness, lxvi. 1&ndash;4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cyprus, often wasted by earthquakes, xci. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cyrenaic school (offshoot of Epicureanism), remove physics and logic, and are content with ethics alone, lxxxix. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Dahae</span> (see <i>n.</i>), objects of Roman conquest, lxxi. 37</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Decius Mus (both father and son, heroes of the Latin wars, 4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), heroism and self-sacrifice of, lxvii. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Demetrius (of Sunium, philosopher and friend of Seneca), definition of an untroubled existence, lxvii. 14; his contempt for gossip, xci. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">Democritus (Greek philosopher, of Abdera, 5th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), supposed madness of, lxxix. 14; discussed as the inventor of the arch, xc. 32 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Didymus (surnamed “Brazen-Bowels,” scholar of Alexandria, <i>fl.</i> 1st century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), his voluminous and variegated writings, on Aeneas, <span><span id="calibre_link-3305" data-page-number="476" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/488" data-page-index="488" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/488"></span></span>Anacreon, Sappho, etc., lxxxviii. 37</li>
<li class="calibre43">Diogenes (the Cynic), contrasted as a philosopher with Daedalus the inventor, xc. 14</li>
<li class="calibre43">Dossennus (ancient Latin comic writer, or a Lype in the Atellane farce), inscription on the tomb of, lxxxix. 7</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Epicurean</span>, a philosophy of leisure, lxviii. 10; void, lxxii. 9; definition of philosophy as twofold, lxxxix. 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">Epicurus (founder of the school, 342&ndash;279 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on the joy of suffering, lxvi. 18, lxvii. 15; on the painless body and the serene mind, lxvi. 46; on the different classes of goods, lxvi. 47 f.; late-won renown of, lxxix. 15 f.; on the payment of obligations, lxxxi. 11; declares virtue alone not sufficient for happiness, lxxxv. 18; on calm amid pain, xcii. 25</li>
<li class="calibre43">Eretrian school (somewhat inclined toward the Socratic), scepticism of, lxxxviii. 44 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Fabii</span> (clan famous in early Roman history), sacrifice in behalf of the state, lxxxii. 20</li>
<li class="calibre43">Fabius Maximus (hero of second Punic war), simple life of, lxxxvi. 10</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">German</span> (gladiator), revolting suicide of a, lxx. 20</li>
<li class="calibre43">Graeci, their use of paradoxes (<i>inopinata</i>) in philosophy, lxxxi. 11; futilities of dialectic, lxxxii. 8 f.; their use of <i>indifferentia</i>, lxxxii. 10; <i>encyclic</i> arts of the, lxxxviii. 23; definition of wisdom, lxxxix. 7; definition of <i>orbatio</i>, lxxxvii. 39; on calm, xcii. 6</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Hannibal</span>, Contrasted with Scipio, lxxxvi. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Helen, age of, compared with Hecuba’s, lxxxviii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hephaestion (volcanic region in Lycia, in Asia Minor), lxxix. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hesiod, compared with Homer in seniority, lxxxviii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Homer, claimed by various schools of philosophy as a witness in their behalf, lxxxviii. 5 f.; in various connexions, lxxxviii. <i>passim</i>; mentions the potter’s wheel, xc. 31</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Horatius Flaccus (Roman poet, 65&ndash;8 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), quoted, lxxxvi. 13</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Jupiter</span>, comparison of, with the ideal sage, lxxiii. 12 ff.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Lacon</span>, Spartan boy who refused to do menial service, lxxvii. 14 f</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lacones (Spartans under <span><span id="calibre_link-3306" data-page-number="477" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/489" data-page-index="489" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/489"></span></span>Leonidas at Thermopylae), lxxxii. 20 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ladas, a traditionally swift runner, lxxxv, 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aebutius Liberalis (friend of Seneca), disconsolate over the Lyons conflagration of <i>c.</i> <span class="wst-asc">64 A.D.</span>, xci. <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Drusus Libo (duped into dreams of empire, committed suicide <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span> 16), contemplated self-destruction of, lxx, 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Liternum (Campanian coast-town), retreat of Scipio, lxxxvi. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucilius (procurator in Sicily and contemporary of Seneca), addressed, <i>passim</i>. <i>See</i> Introduction, vol. i. p. ix</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucrine oysters (from a lake near the Bay of Naples), delicate taste of, lxxviii. 23</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lugudunum (capital of Gaul, now Lyons), destruction of, xci. <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Lycurgus (of Sparta, 9th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>&nbsp;?), giver of laws, xc. 6</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Macedonia</span>, earthquakes in, xci. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Maecenas (prime minister of Augustus), witty saying of, xcii, 35</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tullius Marcellinus (a friend of Seneca), suicide of, lxxvii, 5 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Maximus (a friend of Seneca), lxxxvii. 2 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Medi, objects of Roman conquest, lxxi. 37</li>
<li class="calibre43">Megaric school, scepticism of, lxxxviii, 44 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Menelaus (Homeric hero), actor posing as, lxxx. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Metrodorus (follower of Epicurus), his modest manner of life, lxxix, 15 f.; on the thankfulness of the sage. lxxxi, 11</li>
<li class="calibre43">Metronax (a philosopher, <i>see</i> <i>Ep.</i> xciii. 1), lectures by, lxxvi, 4</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Natalis</span> (early Empire), vileness and richness of, lxxxvii. 16</li>
<li class="calibre43">Nausiphanes (disciple of Pyrrho the Sceptic, 4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on <i>seeming</i> and <i>non-being</i>, lxxxviii. 43 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Neapolis (now Naples), a place for retirement, lxviii. 5; theatre at, lxxvi. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Neptune, the god to whom the sailor prays, lxxiii. 5; invoked by the Rhodian pilot, lxxxv, 33</li>
<li class="calibre43">Nestor (Homeric hero), long life of, lxxvii. 20</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">P. Ovidius Naso</span> (Roman poet, 43 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>&ndash;18 <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span>), his description of Aetna, lxxix. 5; quoted, xc. 20</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Paphus</span> (city on west coast of Cyprus), often wrecked by earthquakes, xci. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parmenides (Greek philosopher, <i>fl.</i> 800 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on the One, lxxxviii, 44 f. <span><span id="calibre_link-3307" data-page-number="478" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/490" data-page-index="490" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/490"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">Penelope, moral character of, lxxxviii. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Peripatetics, their softening of Stoic paradoxes, lxxxv. 3. 81, etc.; their objections to Stoic syllogisms, lxxxvii, 12, 38; their establishment of <i>economic</i> philosophy, lxxxix. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Persae (the Persians), objects of Roman conquest, lxxi. 37</li>
<li class="calibre43">Phalaris, tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily (6th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), the bronze bull of, lxvi. 18</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pharius, pacemaker for Seneca, lxxxiii. 4</li>
<li class="calibre43">Phidias (Athenian sculptor, 5th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), variety of his materials, lxxxv. 40</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucius Piso (Roman official under Augustus), abnormal drunkenness of, lxxxiii. 14 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">L. Munatius Plancus (gov. of Transalpine Gaul, 43 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), founder of Lyons, xci. 14</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pompeii (possibly the birthplace of Lucilius), recalls memories of Seneca's boyhood, lxx. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gn. Pompeius Magnus, three defeats of his forces, lxxi. 8 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lars Porsenna, king of the Etruscans, who yielded to Mucius Scaevola, lxvi. 51 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Posidonius (Stoic philosopher, <i>fl.</i> 1st century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on length of life, lxxviii. 28; opinion on drunkenness, lxxxiii. 10; definition of riches, lxxxvii. 31 ff.; on the arts and crafts, lxxxviii. 21; on the sage and the inventor, xc. 5 ff.; on the weakness of the flesh, xcii. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Protagoras (Greek philosopher of Abdera, 5th century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>), opinion on the flexibility of dialectic, lxxxviii. 43 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Puteoli (a coast-town near Naples in Campania), the idlers of, lxxvii. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pyrrhonic school, scepticism of, lxxxviii. 44 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pythagoras (Greek philosopher, 6th century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>). teacher of many famous lawgivers, xc. 6</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">M. Atilius Regulus</span> (hero of first Punic war), the sufferings of, lxvii. 7, 19; his pledge of honour, lxxi. 17</li>
<li class="calibre43">Rhodian (Telesphorus the), cowardly words of, lxx. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Rutilius Rufus (statesman, banished 92 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), exile of, lxvii. 7; retirement of, lxxix. 14</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Sarmatta</span> (on the eastern side of Scythia), vanity of its rulers, lxxx. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sattia, anecdote about the longevity of, lxxvii. 20</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gaius Mucius Scaevola (Roman legendary period), voluntary self-mutilation of, lxvi. 51 ff. <span><span id="calibre_link-3308" data-page-number="479" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/491" data-page-index="491" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/491"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio (Africanus Maior, conqueror of Hannibal), adoration by Seneca at his house and tomb, lxxxvi. 1 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio (Africanus Minor, conqueror of Carthage in 146 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, and of Numantia in 133 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>). lxvi. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica (admiral, defeated by Caesar's fleet, 46 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), heroism of, lxx. 22; defeat of, lxxi. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Scribonia (<i>see</i> n.), witty saying of, lxx. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Scylla (dangerous rock on Italian side of Sicilian strait), lxxix. 1 f., xcii. 9.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Scythia (from the Carpathians eastward), vanity of its rulers, lxxx. 10; clothing of its inhabitants, xc. 16</li>
<li class="calibre43">Seneca (<i>see</i> Introduction, vol. i.), addresses himself, lxviii. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cornelius Severus (contemp. of Ovid, author of a <i>Bellum Siculum</i>), description of Aetna, lxxix. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sextius (<i>see</i> <i>Ep.</i> lxiv. 2 n., vol. i.), his comparison of the sage with Jupiter, lxxiii. 12, 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sicily, Lucilius’ travels through, lxxix. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Socrates, drinks the poison, lxvii. 7; resignation of, lxx. 9, lxxi. 17; emphasis upon character, lxxi. 7; on truth and virtue, lxxi. 16 late-won renown of, lxxix. 14</li>
<li class="calibre43">Solon (<i>see</i> n. <i>ad loc.</i>), lawgiver of Athens, and one of the seven wise men, xc. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Speusippus (4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, predecessor of Xenocrates as head of the Academy), qualifies the definition of the <i>bonum</i>, lxxxv. 18</li>
<li class="calibre43">Stoic, a certain, who gave good advice to Marcellinus, lxxvii, 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Stoic (school of philosophy), recommendation of the quiet life, lxviii. 1; reply to Peripatetics regarding virtue, lxxxv, 31; paradoxes of the, lxxxvii, 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Syria, earthquakes in, xci. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Syrtes (north coast of Africa), cave-homes of dwellers by the, xc. 17</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Tarentum</span> (city in Southern Italy), a place for retirement, lxviii. 5</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tauromenium (now Taormina) in Sicily, lxxix. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tiberius (emperor 14&ndash;37 <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span>), his confidence in the drunken Cossus, lxxxiii. 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">Timagenes (from Alexandria, historian, and one-time friend of Augustus), grudge against Rome, xci. 13</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Ulysses</span>, home-sickness of, lxvi. 26 wanderings of, lxxxviii. 7 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> <span><span id="calibre_link-3309" data-page-number="480" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/492" data-page-index="492" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/492"></span></span><div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">P. Vergilius Maro</span> (Roman poet, 70&ndash;19 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), quoted, lxvii. 8, lxx. 2, lxxiii. 10 f., 15, lxxvii. 12, lxxviii. 15; description of Aetna, lxxix. 5; quoted, lxxxii. 7, 16, 18, lxxxiv. 3. lxxxv. 4, lxxxvi. 15 f., lxxxvii. 20, lxxxviii. 14, 16, lxxxix. 17, xc. 9, 11, 37; on Scylla, xcii. 9; quoted, xcii. 29, 34</li>
<li class="calibre43">Virgo, the aqueduct, a colder plunge than the Tiber, lxxxiii. 5</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Xenocrates</span> (4th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, successor of Speusippus as head of the Academy), qualifies the definition of the <i>bonum</i>, lxxxv. 18</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Zaleucus</span> (of Magna Graecia, 7th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), lawmaker, xc. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Zeno (founder of Stoicism, <i>fl.</i> 300 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), over-subtle syllogism of, lxxxii. 9, 19; objections to drunkenness, lxxxiii. 9 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Zeno, of Elea (Greek dialectic philosopher, 5th century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), denial of everything, lxxxviii. 44 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="wst-asc">END OF VOL. II</span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre10"><i>Printed in Great Britain by</i> R. &amp; R. <span class="smallcaps">Clark, Limited</span>, <i>Edinburgh</i></span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="calibre3"></div>

</div></td>

<td class="multicol-break">
<div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre18">Volume III.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt16" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-3310" data-page-number="455" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/467" data-page-index="467" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/467"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre38">INDEX OF PROPER NAMES</span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Africa</span>, Pompey in, xciv. 65; Cato’s march through the deserts of, civ. 33; crops in, cxiv. 26; marbles from, cxv. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Vipsanius Agrippa (counsellor of Augustus) on harmony in government, xciv. 46 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Alban villa (Seneca’s), visit to, cxxiii. 1 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Alexander the Great (356-323 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), his conquests of Greece, Persia, and India, xciv. 62 f.; cxiii. 29 f.; cxix. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ancus Marcius (Roman king), doubtful parentage of, cviii. 30</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Gavius Apicius (epicure, age of Tiberius), extravagance of, xcv. 42; gluttony of, cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">Appius Claudius Caecus (censor 312 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), source for archaic oratorical style, cxiv. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">Archedemus (Stoic, of Tarsus, second century <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), authority of, cxxi. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ardea (on sea-coast, S. of Rome), country-place of Lucilius, cv. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Aristo of Chius (Stoic, 3rd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on the superfluity of precepts, xciv. 1 ff.; on admiration of superfluous things, cxv. 8 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">L. Arruntius (cos. <span class="wst-asc">A.D.</span> 6), imitator of Sallust’s style, cxiv. 17 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Asclepiades (Greek physician at Rome, 2nd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C</span>), xcv. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Attalus (Stoic, teacher of Seneca), on philosophical ambition, cviii. <i>passim</i>; on the worthlessness of riches, cx. 14 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">T. Pomponius Atticus (friend of Cicero), regularity of his correspondence, cxviii. 1.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Liber</span> (<span class="smallcaps">Bacchus</span>), travels of, xciv. 63</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Junius Brutus (author, friend of Cicero, and slayer of Caesar) on precepts, xcv. 45</li>
<li class="calibre43">Acilius Buta (<i>temp.</i> Tiberius), night life of, cxxii. 10 ff.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Caecilius</span> (<i>temp.</i> Cicero), penuriousness of, cxviii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Caelius (see note <i>ad loc.</i>) quoted, cxiii. 26</li>
<li class="calibre43">Caesar (Augustus, the Emperor) delegates power to Maecenas, cxiv. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Iulius Caesar, ambition of, xciv. 65 f.; relations with Cato the Younger, xcv. 70; part in Clodian trial, xcvii. 2, 8; civ. 29 f.; cxviii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Licinius Calvus (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), xciv. 25</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cato, “wisdom” of, quoted, xciv. 27; cxix. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Porcius Cato (the Censor), nobility of, xcv. 72&nbsp;; civ. 21</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Porcius Cato (the Younger), his courage in the face of Caesar and Pompey, xcv. 69 ff.; his part in the trial of Clodius, xcvii. 1 ff.; heroism of, xcviii. 12; civ. 21; conduct during Civil War, <i>ib.</i> 29 ff.; used as a dialectic illustration, cxvii. 13; contrasted with Vatinius, cxviii. 4 and cxx. 19; quoted, cxxii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Lutatius Catulus (cos. 78 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), witticism of, xcvii. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chimaera (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), cxiii. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Chrysippus (Stoic, successor of Cleanthes), civ. 22; utters great words, cviii. 38; on the source of muscular activity, cxiii. 23 f. <span><span id="calibre_link-3311" data-page-number="456" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/468" data-page-index="468" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/468"></span></span></li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Tullius Cicero, quoted in regard to the trial of Clodius, xcvii. 3 ff.; style and rank of, c. 7 ff.; as translator, cvii. 10; quoted (from the <i>De Re Publica</i>), cviii. 30 ff.; on rhetorical subtleties, cxi. 1; style of, cxiv. 16; advice to Atticus, cxviii. 1 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cleanthes (successor of Zeno as head of the Stoic school), on the relation of precepts to general principles of philosophy, xciv. 4 ff.; hymn of, cvii. 10 f.; on rules of poetry, cviii. 10; on the source of muscular activity, cxiii. 23 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Clodius Pulcher (d. 52 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), defendant in adultery charge, xcvii. 2 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Ti. Coruncanius (cos. 280 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), source for archaic oratorical style, cxiv. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">L. Licinius Crassus (b. 140 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), source for oratorical vocabulary, cxiv. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Licinius Crassus (the triumvir), opponent of Cato, civ. 29; riches of, cxix. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Scribonius Curio (cos. 76 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), source for oratorical vocabulary, cxiv. 13</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Darius</span> (king of Persia), xciv. 63; cxix. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">M’. Curius Dentatus (cos. 290 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), sternness of, cxx. 19</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Egypt</span>, marbles from, cxv. 8</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Ennius (Roman poet, fl. 200 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), verses on Scipio Africanus, cviii. 32 f.; indebtedness to Homer, <i>ib.</i> 34</li>
<li class="calibre43">Epicurus (founder of school, 342&ndash;279 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) quoted, xcvii. 13, 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">Euripides (Greek tragic poet), anecdote of, cxv. 15 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Papirius Fabianus</span> (teacher of Seneca), style of, c. <i>passim</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Fabricius Luscinus (<i>temp.</i> Pyrrhus), self-restraint of, xcviii. 13; loyalty and temperance of, cxx. 6; plainness of, cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">Fenestella (Augustan antiquarian) on the death of Romulus, cviii. 31</li>
<li class="calibre43">Floralia (Roman festival, April 28 to May 3), tributes to Cato during the, xcvii. 8</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Gallio</span> (brother of Seneca), illness of, in Achaia, civ. 1 and note <i>ad loc.</i></li>
<li class="calibre43">Genius (the “patron saint” of Roman men), cx. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Germans, bound-up hair of, cxxiv. 22</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Sempronius Gracchus (tribune 123 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), source for oratorical vocabulary, cxiv. 13</li>
<li class="calibre43">Greeks, a proverb of the, cxiv. 1; preceptive philosophy of, xcv. 1; <i>ib.</i> 10; association with their philosophers, civ. 21; tragic poets, quoted, cxv. 14 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Hercules</span>, travels of, xciv. 63</li>
<li class="calibre43">Hippocrates (“Father of Medicine,” 5th cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), xcv. 9; on the health of women, <i>ib.</i> 20</li>
<li class="calibre43">Homer, indebtedness of Ennius to, cviii. 34</li>
<li class="calibre43">Horatius (defender of Rome against Tarquins), heroism of, cxx. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Horatius Flaccus (poet, Augustan age) quoted, cxix. 13 f.; cxx. 20 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Jugurtha</span> (African prince, conquered by Marius), xciv. 60</li>
<li class="calibre43">Juno, dedications to, xcv. 47; patroness of women, cx. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Jupiter, dedications to, xcv. 47; <i>ib.</i> 72; addressed in hymn of Cleanthes, cvii. 10 f.; happiness of, cx. 18; independence of, cxix. 7</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">C. Laelius Sapiens</span> (friend of Scipio the Younger), sanity of, xcv. 72; civ. 21</li>
<li class="calibre43">Latin language, technical terms in, xcv. 65</li>
<li class="calibre43">Licinus (native of Gaul; appointed governor in 15 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), riches of, cxix. 9; cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">T. Livius (historian, age of Augustus) reckoned as both historian and philosopher, c. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Lucilius (procurator in Sicily and contemporary of Seneca) ad<span><span id="calibre_link-3312" data-page-number="457" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/469" data-page-index="469" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/469"></span></span>dressed, <i>passim</i>. See Introduction, vol. i. p. ix</li>
<li class="calibre43">T. Lucretius Carus (Roman poet, 1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) quoted xcv. 11; on corporeality, cvi. 8; on fear, cx. 6 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Maeander</span> (river in Phrygia, Asia Minor), tortuous course of, civ. 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Cilnius Maecenas (minister of Augustus), his womanly fear of death, ci. 10 ff.; careless speech of, cxiv. <i>passim</i>; daintiness of, cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Marius (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), political and martial ambition of, xciv. 66</li>
<li class="calibre43">Iunius (?) Marullus (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), consolation addressed to, xcix. 1 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Metrodorus (follower of Epicurus), quoted, xcviii. 9; on the pleasure of sadness, xcix. 25 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Metronax, death of, xciii. 1 (and note)</li>
<li class="calibre43">Mithridates (king of Pontus), conquered by Pompey, xciv. 65</li>
<li class="calibre43">Iulius Montanus (poet and favourite of Tiberius), anecdote of, cxxii. 11 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Mucius Scaevola (hero of Etruscan wars), heroism of, xcviii. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Cn. Naevius</span> (early Roman writer of drama) quoted, cii. 16</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pinarius Natta (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), cxxii. 11 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Nile, rising in summer, civ. 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">Nomentum (Latin town 14 m. N.E. of Rome), Seneca's villa at, civ. 1 ff.; cx. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Numidian outriders, cxxiii. 7</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">P. Octavius</span> (gourmand, age of Tiberius), bids against Apicius, xcv. 42</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Ovidius Naso (Roman poet, Augustan age), on the lower order of gods, cx. 1; on gold, cxv. 13</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Panaetius</span> (head of Stoic school, 2nd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) on love, cxvi. 5 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sextus Papinius (an Early Empire night-liver), cxxii. 15 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Parthians (tribe E. of Euphrates), flowing hair of, cxxiv. 22</li>
<li class="calibre43">Paulina (wife of Seneca), civ. 2 ff., note <i>ad loc.</i>, and Introduction, vol. i.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pedo Albinovanus (poet, contemporary of Ovid), anecdote of, cxxii. 15 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Peripatetics, their interpretation of emotion, cxvi. 1; on wisdom and being wise, cxvii. 11 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Phaedo (contemporary of Plato) quoted, xciv. 41</li>
<li class="calibre43">Philip (of Macedon, father of Alexander), conquests of, xciv. 62</li>
<li class="calibre43">Phrygian priests (worshippers of Cybele), enthusiasm of, cviii. 7</li>
<li class="calibre43">Plato (Athenian philosopher, 428&ndash;347 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), Laws of, discussed by Posidonius, xciv. 33; master of wisdom, cviii. 38</li>
<li class="calibre43">C. Asinius Pollio (patron of Vergil), style and rank of, c. 7 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Gn. Pompeius (the triumvir), ambitious campaigns of, xciv. 64 f.; relations with Cato the Younger, xcv. 70; part in Clodian trial, xcvii. 8; civ. 29 ff.; cxviii. 2</li>
<li class="calibre43">Posidonius (Stoic philosopher, friend of Cicero), on Plato's <i>Laws</i>, xciv. 38; on precepts, and other aids to virtue, xcv. 65 f.; civ. 22; cviii. 33; on independence of fortune, cxiii. 28; cxxi. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">Publilius Syrus (writer of farces, 1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>, and traditional source of many proverbs) quoted, xciv. 28; cviil. 8 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pyrrhus (king of Epirus, 3rd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), relations with Fabricius, cxx. 6</li>
<li class="calibre43">Pythagoras (Greek philosopher, 6th cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), on impressions of divinity, xciv. 42; reasons for abstaining from animal food, cviii. 17 ff.</li></ul>
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">M. Atilius Regulus</span> (hero of first Punic war), heroism of, xcviii. 12</li>
<li class="calibre43">Romulus (first Roman king), death of, cviii. 31</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Rutilius Rufus (1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), heroism of, xcviii. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">C. Sallustius Crispus</span> (historian, close of Republic), quoted, cix. <span><span id="calibre_link-3313" data-page-number="458" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/470" data-page-index="470" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/470"></span></span>16; aped by later historians because of archaic style, cxiv. 17 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio (Africanus Major) praised by Ennius, cviii. 32 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Cornelius Scipio (Africanus Minor, conqueror of Carthage in 146 <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), friendship with Laelius, xcv. 72</li>
<li class="calibre43">Scythians (tribe inhabiting steppes of S. Russia), flowing hair of, cxxiv. 22</li>
<li class="calibre43">Seneca, see Introduction, vol. i.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Cornelius Senecio (friend of Seneca), untimely death of, ci. 1 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sertorius (1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) conquered by Pompey in Spain, xciv. 64</li>
<li class="calibre43">Servius Tullius (Roman king), doubtful parentage of, cviii. 30</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Sextius (the Elder), declines honour at Caesar's hand, xcviii. 13; vegetarianism of, cviii. 17 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sicily, crops in, cxiv. 26</li>
<li class="calibre43">Socrates, resignation of, xcviii. 12; on restless travel, civ. 7; <i>ib.</i> 21; sufferings of, civ. 27 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Sotion (the Pythagorean, contemporary of Seneca) on vegetarianism, cviii. 17 ff.</li>
<li class="calibre43">Stoics, on the value of precepts, xciv. 2 ff.; on the limits to mourning, xcix. 27 f.; their many great masters, cviii. 38; resemblance to early Romans in their opinion of the gods, cx. 1; their leaders on the “animality” of the virtues, cxiii. 1 ff.; on the primal essence, cxiii. 23; on the emotions, cxvi. 1 ff. and 7; on wisdom and corporeality, cxvii. 1 ff.; on <i>bonum</i> and <i>honestum</i>, cxx. 1 ff.; overdone ideas of omniscience, cxxiii. 15 f.</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Tanusius Geminus</span> (historian 1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), “heaviness” of, xciii. 11. For discussion of his identification with Volusius see edd. of Catullus, 36</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Terentius Afer (writer of comedies, 2nd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>) quoted xcv. 53</li>
<li class="calibre43">Themison (pupil of Asclepiades, 1st cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), xcv. 9</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tiberius (Second Roman Emperor), puts a fish up for auction, xcv. 42; opposition to foreign cults, cviii. 22; epigram of, cxxii. 10</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tibur (now Tivoli), earthenware from, cxix. 3</li>
<li class="calibre43">Tigris, disappearance and reappearance of, civ. 15</li>
<li class="calibre43">Q. Aelius Tubero (2nd cent. <span class="wst-asc">B.C.</span>), simple sacrifice of, xcv. 72 f.; xcviii. 13; civ. 21; cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">Twelve Tables, as source for orators’ vocabularies, cxiv. 13</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Ulysses</span>, self-restraint of, cxxiii. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Varus</span> (an Early Empire parasite), epigram of, cxxii. 12 f.</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Vatinius (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), xciv. 25; cxviii. 4; cxx. 19</li>
<li class="calibre43">P. Vergilius Maro, quoted, xciv. 28; xcv. 33, 68 f.; xcviii. 5; ci. 4; <i>ib.</i> 13; cii. 30; civ. 10; <i>ib.</i> 24; <i>ib.</i> 31 (comparing Cato with Achilles); cvii. 3; cviii. 24, 26, 29, 34 (indebtedness to Ennius); cxiv. 23; cxv. 4 f.; cxxii. 2; cxxiv. 1</li>
<li class="calibre43">M. Vinicius (see note <i>ad loc.</i>), cxxii. 12</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="calibre3">
<ul class="calibre42"><li class="calibre43"><span class="smallcaps">Zeno</span> (founder of Stoicism), on death, civ. 21; master of wisdom, cviii. 38</li></ul>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div></td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div><div about="#mwt4" class="calibre44"></div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-512"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-3314" data-page-number="3" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales (IA adlucilium02sene).pdf/15" data-page-index="15" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales_(IA_adlucilium02sene).pdf/15"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
<p><span class="calibre38">THE EPISTLES OF SENECA</span>
</p>
</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
