<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XVI. ON PHILOSOPHY, THE GUIDE OF LIFE</h2>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2514"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> It is clear to you, I am sure, Lucilius, that no man can live a happy life, or even a supportable life, without the study of wisdom; you know also that a happy life is reached when our wisdom is brought to completion, but that life is at least endurable even when our wisdom is only begun.  This idea, however, clear though it is, must be strengthened and implanted more deeply by daily reflection; it is more important for you to keep the resolutions you have already made than to go on and make noble ones.  You must persevere, must develop new strength by continuous study, until that which is only a good inclination becomes a good settled purpose.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2515"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> Hence you no longer need to come to me with much talk and protestations; I know that you have made great progress.  I understand the feelings which prompt your words; they are not feigned or specious words.  Nevertheless I shall tell you what I think,&mdash;that at present I have hopes for you, but not yet perfect trust.  And I wish that you would adopt the same attitude towards yourself; there is no reason why you should put confidence in yourself too quickly and readily.  Examine yourself; scrutinize and observe yourself in divers ways; but mark, before all else, whether it is in philosophy or merely in life itself<sup id="calibre_link-564" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-562" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup> that you have made progress.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2517"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> Philosophy is no trick to catch the public; it is not devised for show.  It is a matter, not of words, but of facts.  It is not pursued in order that the day may yield some amusement before it is spent, or that our leisure may be relieved of a tedium that irks us.  It moulds and constructs the soul; it orders our life, guides our conduct, shows us what we should do and what we should leave undone; it sits at the helm and directs our course as we waver amid uncertainties. Without it, no one can live fearlessly or in peace of mind.  Countless things that happen every hour call for advice; and such advice is to be sought in philosophy.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2518"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> Perhaps someone will say: “How can philosophy help me, if Fate exists?  Of what avail is philosophy, if God rules the universe?  Of what avail is it, if Chance governs everything?  For not only is it impossible to change things that are determined, but it is also impossible to plan beforehand against what is undetermined; either God has forestalled my plans, and decided what I am to do, or else Fortune gives no free play to my plans.” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2519"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> Whether the truth, Lucilius, lies in one or in all of these views, we must be philosophers; whether Fate binds us down by an inexorable law, or whether God as arbiter of the universe has arranged everything, or whether Chance drives and tosses human affairs without method, philosophy ought to be our defence.  She will encourage us to obey God cheerfully, but Fortune defiantly; she will teach us to follow God and endure Chance. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2521"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">6.</b></sup></span> But it is not my purpose now to be led into a discussion as to what is within our own control,&mdash;if foreknowledge is supreme, or if a chain of fated events drags us along in its clutches, or if the sudden and the unexpected play the tyrant over us; I return now to my warning and my exhortation, that you should not allow the impulse of your spirit to weaken and grow cold.  Hold fast to it and establish it firmly, in order that what is now impulse may become a habit of the mind.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2522"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">7.</b></sup></span> If I know you well, you have already been trying to find out, from the very beginning of my letter, what little contribution it brings to you.  Sift the letter, and you will find it.  You need not wonder at any genius of mine; for as yet I am lavish only with other men’s property.&mdash;But why did I say “other men”?  Whatever is well said by anyone is mine.&mdash;This also is a saying of Epicurus:<sup id="calibre_link-565" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-563" type="noteref"><span>[</span>2<span>]</span></a></sup> “If you live according to nature, you will never be poor; if you live according to opinion, you will never be rich.” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2523"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">8.</b></sup></span> Nature’s wants are slight; the demands of opinion are boundless. Suppose that the property of many millionaires is heaped up in your possession. Assume that fortune carries you far beyond the limits of a private income, decks you with gold, clothes you in purple, and brings you to such a degree of luxury and wealth that you can bury the earth under your marble floors; that you may not only possess, but tread upon, riches.  Add statues, paintings, and and whatever any art has devised for the satisfaction of luxury; you will only learn from such things to crave still greater.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2525"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">9.</b></sup></span> Natural desires are limited; but those which spring from false opinion can have no stopping-point.  The false has no limits.  When you are travelling on a road, there must be an end; but when astray, your wanderings are limitless.  Recall your steps, therefore, from idle things, and when you would know whether that which you seek is based upon a natural or upon a misleading desire, consider whether it can stop at any definite point.  If you find, after having travelled far, that there is a more distant goal always in view, you may be sure that this condition is contrary to nature.  Farewell.
</p>
<ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-562" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-564">↑</a></span> <span><i>i.e.</i>, have merely advanced in years.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-563" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-565">↑</a></span> <span>Frag. 201 Usener.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<h2>XVII. ON PHILOSOPHY AND RICHES</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2527"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> Cast away everything of that sort, if you are wise; nay, rather that you may be wise; strive toward a sound mind at top speed and with your whole strength.  If any bond holds you back, untie it, or sever it. “But,” you say, “my estate delays me; I wish to make such disposition of it that it may suffice for me when I have nothing to do, lest either poverty be a burden to me, or I myself a burden to others.” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2528"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> You do not seem, when you say this, to know the strength and power of that good which you are considering.  You do indeed grasp the all-important thing, the great benefit which philosophy confers, but you do not yet discern accurately its various functions, nor do you yet know how great is the help we receive from philosophy in everything, everywhere,&mdash;how, (to use Cicero’s language,<sup id="calibre_link-30" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-27" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup>) it not only succours us in the greatest matters but also descends to the smallest.  Take my advice; call wisdom into consultation; she will advise you not to sit for ever at your ledger.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2530"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> Doubtless, your object, what you wish to attain by such postponement of your studies, is that poverty may not have to be feared by you.  But what if it is something to be desired? Riches have shut off many a man from the attainment of wisdom; poverty is unburdened and free from care.  When the trumpet sounds, the poor man knows that he is not being attacked; when there is a cry of “Fire,”<sup id="calibre_link-31" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-28" type="noteref"><span>[</span>2<span>]</span></a></sup> he only seeks a way of escape, and does not ask what he can save; if the poor man must go to sea, the harbour does not resound, nor do the wharves bustle with the retinue of one individual.  No throng of slaves surrounds the poor man,&mdash;slaves for whose mouths the master must covet the fertile crops of regions beyond the sea.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2531"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> It is easy to fill a few stomachs, when they are well trained and crave nothing else but to be filled.  Hunger costs but little; squeamishness costs much.  Poverty is contented with fulfilling pressing needs.
</p><p>Why, then, should you reject Philosophy as a comrade?  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2532"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> Even the rich man copies her ways when he is in his senses. If you wish to have leisure for your mind, either be a poor man, or resemble a poor man.  Study cannot be helpful unless you take pains to live simply; and living simply is voluntary poverty.  Away, then, with all excuses like: “I have not yet enough; when I have gained the desired amount, then I shall devote myself wholly to philosophy.” And yet this ideal, which you are putting off and placing second to other interests, should be secured first of all; you should begin with it.  You retort: “I wish to acquire something to live on.” Yes, but learn while you are acquiring it; for if anything forbids you to live nobly, nothing forbids you to die nobly.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2534"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">6.</b></sup></span> There is no reason why poverty should call us away from philosophy,&mdash;no, nor even actual want.  For when hastening after wisdom, we must endure even hunger.  Men have endured hunger when their towns were besieged, and what other reward for their endurance did they obtain than that they did not fall under the conqueror’s power?  How much greater is the promise of the prize of everlasting liberty, and the assurance that we need fear neither God nor man!  Even though we starve, we must reach that goal.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2535"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">7.</b></sup></span> Armies have endured all manner of want, have lived on roots, and have resisted hunger by means of food too revolting to mention.  All this they have suffered to gain a kingdom, and,&mdash;what is more marvellous,&mdash;to gain a kingdom that will be another’s.  Will any man hesitate to endure poverty, in order that he may free his mind from madness?
</p><p>Therefore one should not seek to lay up riches first; one may attain to philosophy, however, even without money for the journey.  <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2536"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">8.</b></sup></span> It is indeed so.  After you have come to possess all other things, shall you then wish to possess wisdom also?  Is philosophy to be the last requisite in life,&mdash;a sort of supplement?  Nay, your plan should be this: be a philosopher now, whether you have anything or not,&mdash;for if you have anything, how do you know that you have not too much already?&mdash;but if you have nothing, seek understanding first, before anything else. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2537"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">9.</b></sup></span> “But,” you say, “I shall lack the necessities of life.” In the first place, you cannot lack them; because nature demands but little, and the wise man suits his needs to nature.  But if the utmost pinch of need arrives, he will quickly take leave of life and cease being a trouble to himself. If, however, his means of existence are meagre and scanty, he will make the best of them, without being anxious or worried about anything more than the bare necessities; he will do justice to his belly and his shoulders; with free and happy spirit he will laugh at the bustling of rich men, and the flurried ways of those who are hastening after wealth, <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2539"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">10.</b></sup></span> and say: “Why of your own accord postpone your real life to the distant future?  Shall you wait for some interest to fall due, or for some income on your merchandise, or for a place in the will of some wealthy old man, when you can be rich here and now.  Wisdom offers wealth in ready money, and pays it over to those in whose eyes she has made wealth superfluous.” These remarks refer to other men; you are nearer the rich class.  Change the age in which you live, and you have too much.  But in every age, what is enough remains the same.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2540"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">11.</b></sup></span> I might close my letter at this point, if I had not got you into bad habits.  One cannot greet Parthian royalty without bringing a gift; and in your case I cannot say farewell without paying a price.  But what of it?  I shall borrow from Epicurus:<sup id="calibre_link-32" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-29" type="noteref"><span>[</span>3<span>]</span></a></sup> “The acquisition of riches has been for many men, not an end, but a change, of troubles.” <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-2541"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">12.</b></sup></span> I do not wonder.  For the fault is not in the wealth, but in the mind itself. That which had made poverty a burden to us, has made riches also a burden. Just as it matters little whether you lay a sick man on a wooden or on a golden bed, for whithersoever he be moved he will carry his malady with him; so one need not care whether the diseased mind is bestowed upon riches or upon poverty.  His malady goes with the man.  Farewell.
</p>
<ol class="references" about="#mwt4">
<li id="calibre_link-27" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-30">↑</a></span> <span>Perhaps from the <i>Hortensius</i>; see Müller, Frag. 98, p. 326.</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-28" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-31">↑</a></span> <span>Literally, “Water!”</span>
</li>
<li id="calibre_link-29" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-32">↑</a></span> <span>Frag. 479 Usener.</span>
</li>
</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
