<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-116" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CXI. ON THE VANITY OF MENTAL GYMNASTICS</h2>
</div>
<p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4875"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">1.</b></sup></span> You have asked me to give you a Latin word for the Greek <i>sophismata</i>. Many have tried to define the term, but no name has stuck. This is natural, inasmuch as the thing itself has not been admitted to general use by us; the name, too, has met with opposition. But the word which Cicero used seems to me most suitable: he calls them <i>cavillationes</i>. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4876"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">2.</b></sup></span> If a man has surrendered himself to them, he weaves many a tricky subtlety, but makes no progress toward real living; he does not thereby become braver, or more restrained, or loftier of spirit.
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p> <span><span id="calibre_link-4877" data-page-number="279" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/291" data-page-index="291" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/291"></span></span>He, however, who has practised philosophy to effect his own cure, becomes high-souled, full of confidence, invincible, and greater as you draw near him. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4878"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">3.</b></sup></span> This phenomenon is seen in the case of high mountains, which appear less lofty when beheld from afar, but which prove clearly how high the peaks are when you come near them; such, my dear Lucilius, is our true philosopher, true by his acts and not by his tricks. He stands in a high place, worthy of admiration, lofty, and really great. He does not stretch himself or walk on tiptoe like those who seek to improve their height by deceit, wishing to seem taller than they really are; he is content with his own greatness. <span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4879"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">4.</b></sup></span> And why should he not be content with having grown to such a height that Fortune cannot reach her hands to it? He is therefore above earthly things, equal to himself under all conditions,&mdash;whether the current of life runs free, or whether he is tossed and travels on troubled and desperate seas; but this steadfastness cannot be gained through such hair-splittings as I have just mentioned. The mind plays with them, but profits not a whit; the mind in such cases is simply dragging philosophy down from her heights to the level ground.
</p><p><span class="wst-verse" id="calibre_link-4880"><sup class="reference"><b class="calibre32">5.</b></sup></span> I would not forbid you to practise such exercises occasionally; but let it be at a time when you wish to do nothing. The worst feature, however, that these indulgences present is that they acquire a sort of self-made charm, occupying and holding the soul by a show of subtlety; although such weighty matters claim our attention, and a whole life seems scarcely sufficient to learn the single principle of despising life. “What? Did you not mean ‘control’ instead of ‘despise<span class="calibre40">’</span>”? No; “controlling” <span><span id="calibre_link-4881" data-page-number="281" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/293" data-page-index="293" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/293"></span></span>is the second task; for no one has controlled his life aright unless he has first learned to despise it. Farewell.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div> 
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" lang="en" id="calibre_link-856"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt4" lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-4882" data-page-number="281" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 3.djvu/293" data-page-index="293" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_3.djvu/293"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
