<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>THE TEXT</h2>

<p>The manuscripts of the <i>Letters</i> fall into two clearly defined parts; from I. to LXXXVIII. inclusive, and from LXXXIX. to CXXIV. They are divided into books; but in this translation we shall number them only by letters. For a more detailed description the reader is referred to Hense’s preface to the 1914 Teubner edition.
</p><p>MSS. available for the first part of the <i>Letters</i> are&mdash;<br class="calibre3" />
</p>
<div class="calibre37">(1) Two Paris MSS. of the 10th century, p and P.</div>
<div class="calibre37">(2) Another Paris MS. of the 11th century, b.</div>
<div class="calibre37">(3) The <i>codex Laurentianus</i>, of the 9th or 10th century, containing letters I.&ndash;LXV. This is designated as L.</div>
<div class="calibre37">(4) The <i>codex Venetus</i>, of the same date, containing Nos. LIII.&ndash;LXXXVIII. V.</div>
<div class="calibre37">(5) The <i>codex Metensis</i>, of the 11th century, known as M.</div>
<div class="calibre37">(6) The <i>codex Gudianus</i>, of the 10th century, which contains scraps of the earliest letters. Designated as g.</div>
<p>For the second part of the <i>Letters</i>, LXXXIX.&ndash;CXXIV., there is a more limited choice. The best MS. is&mdash;
</p>
<div class="calibre37"><i>Codex Bambergensis</i>, of the 9th century, known as B.</div>
<div class="calibre37"><i>Codex Argentoratensis</i>, A, which was destroyed in the siege of Strassburg, of the 9th or 10th century.</div>
<p>Other MSS., either of less importance or of later date, may be found in Hense’s preface.<sup id="calibre_link-1821" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-1820" type="noteref"><span>[</span>1<span>]</span></a></sup>
</p>
<ol class="references" about="#mwt8">
<li id="calibre_link-1820" type="footnote" class="calibre36"><span><a href="#calibre_link-1821">↑</a></span> <span>Where the testimony of these later MSS. seems sound, the translator has omitted Hense’s brackets; the headings of the books into which the <i>Letters</i> were originally divided are also omitted.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<p><span class="calibre18">BIBLIOGRAPHY</span>
</p>
<div class="wst-center">
<p>EDITIONS
</p>
</div>
<div class="calibre37">1475.&mdash;Editio Princeps, Naples. In this were included most of the philosopher’s works, together with several by the elder Seneca. The Epistles were published separately, in the same year, at Paris, Rome, and Strassburg.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1515.&mdash;Erasmus, Basle.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1605.&mdash;J. Lipsius, Antwerp.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1649&ndash;1658.&mdash;J. F. Gronovius (together with the Elder Seneca), Leyden.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1797&ndash;1811.&mdash;F. E. Ruhkopf, Leipzig.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1842.&mdash;C. R. Fickert, Leipzig.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1852.&mdash;F. Haase, Leipzig.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1898.&mdash;O. Hense, Leipzig.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1908.&mdash;Alan P. Ball, <i>Selected Essays of Seneca</i>, etc., New York. This edition contains a few of the letters.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1910.&mdash;W. C. Summers, London. (Selections.)</div>
<div class="calibre37">1914.&mdash;O. Hense, Leipzig. (Second edition.)</div>
<p>There have been many others; but these are the most important.
</p>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
<p>ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS
</p>
</div>
<div class="calibre37">1614.&mdash;Thomas Lodge, London.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1673.&mdash;Sir Roger L’Estrange, <i>Seneca’s Morals by Way of Abstract</i>, London.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1786.&mdash;T. Morell, D.D., London.</div>
<div class="calibre37">1888.&mdash;The Camelot Series contains some selections, put together from Lodge and L’Estrange. Edited by Walter Clode.</div>
<div class="wst-dhr">&nbsp;</div><div class="calibre3"></div>
 <span><span id="calibre_link-2291" data-page-number="xv" data-page-name="Page:Ad Lucilium epistulae morales, volume 1.djvu/23" data-page-index="23" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:Ad_Lucilium_epistulae_morales,_volume_1.djvu/23"></span></span><div class="wst-center">
<p>GENERAL WORKS
</p>
</div>
<p>The best life of Seneca is by René Waltz, Paris, 1909. A selection of the most important special works on this subject is given in an appendix to the volume. The editions of and Hense also contain helpful bibliographies.
</p><p>For an understanding of Seneca’s influence on later writers the reader is referred to section C of Professor Summers’ edition.
</p><p>An excellent account of Seneca’s place in the history of Stoicism may be found in the work of E. V. Arnold, <i>Roman Stoicism</i>, Cambridge, 1911, and in C. Martha’s <i>Les Moralistes sous l’Empire romain</i>, Paris, 1900, pages 1&ndash;100.
</p><p>Canon F. W. Farrar’s <i>Seekers After God</i> contains a chapter on Seneca and his religious significance.
</p><p>S. Dill, <i>Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius</i>, London, 1903, is also of value.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
